---
title: A Biblical response to the events of 2020
date: 2021-01-11 22:56:00 Z
permalink: "/posts/a-biblical-response-to-the-events-of-2020.html"
categories:
- posts
---

2020 has been a year of unfortunate and, in some cases, unexpected events. A global pandemic has swept the world, and our country remains in disarray, distrust, fear, and uncertainty. Aggression from police has triggered an unwavering focus, near obsession, on fighting injustice, but protest has frequently led to violence, destruction and death. Political division, while not unique to 2020, has become a national past-time and continues to fuel anger, disagreement, bitterness, and dissent. National economies the world over are struggling and on the brink of collapse, or so we are led to believe. People are out of work or displaced, many are marginalized, and the world seems a worse place than ever before.

While on the face of it all of these things are true and deeply concerning, the reality is that all of it is expected, was predicted before any of us were born, and will likely continue long after all of us are gone, unless the Lord returns first. More than that, much of what we believe to be wrong with the world is either a lie of the evil one, or a stumbling block placed by the evil one to cause the world to fail to recognize their creator and even believers in the Lord Jesus to go astray.

## What motivates us?

The primary motivator of current events in 2020 has been fear. More than hate and bitterness and spite and disunity and everything else, fear is driving nearly everyone. If we as Christians are to rise above the problems caused by the pandemic, the first thing we must deal with is our own fear. God calls us to be bold and unafraid (2 Timothy 1:7), and promises us that we have an eternal future with Him (John 10:28-29). Therefore, fear is not an emotion that believers should live with. Sure, it will come and go, but I submit that we should treat fear like we treat any sin in our lives. We should bring it to God and repent. Why? Not because fear in and of itself is sin, but because fear is at the root of much of our failure to live in Godliness and fulfill God’s purpose for our lives. When we allow fear to control us, we are allowing Satan a foothold that pushes back on the influence of the Holy Spirit over our hearts and minds.

### Unpacking fear

So how do we deal with fear? While there is no silver bullet solution for conquering fear, the reality is that we must practice a lifestyle that operates in the manner God has designed for us. An overwhelming preoccupation with the things of the world has a significant impact on our mental state, and is not consistent with God’s design or plan. This is made clear by Jesus in the parable of the sower (Mark 4:18-19), where he describes the seed that falls on thorny soil, which is the cares of this world and the desire for riches that choke the word and prove it to be unfruitful in us. Abstaining from social media and avoiding following every breaking story in the news and media are easy ways to bring our mental state back into balance. Being aware of, but not preoccupied by, the things going on in the world allows us to focus instead on the things of God and our immediate surroundings. When we do this, fear begins to subside and seems much more possible to conquer (Philippians 4:6-7). Practicing making decisions based on wisdom, common sense, and Godly principles instead of fear will begin to build our confidence that God’s ways are right and will see us through whatever comes our way. In some cases, the decisions will be the same, but the difference in process will give us confidence in God. Armed with confidence, we can topple what remains of our fear.

## Where is our rallying banner?

Social injustice and systemic racism are on the minds of untold millions of people in our world today. In my field alone, almost everyone with any influence, including small and large business owners who operate websites that receive a lot of traffic, are using that influence to bring “awareness” to the cause. Others are using social media platforms to boost awareness of social causes. Without any explanation for how it fits into their world view, these influencers are pointing others towards the ideologically Marxist group called Black Lives Matter. This group, and several others, are calling people to civil unrest and protest. Armed with a historically unparalleled level of ignorance and, in some cases, physical weapons, tens of thousands of young people are rallying to the arguably ambiguous cause, and demanding change in our law enforcement system. Political unrest and riots are now commonplace, and violence and death are becoming the normative news headline of “protests” in most major U.S. cities. Some believe we are on the brink of a street war between civil activists and law enforcement, but in reality there are more than a few groups using protests to sow violence and further other far more nefarious agendas.

### A Christian’s response

So how does a Christian respond to all this? To put it quite bluntly, the primary response we should have is to not participate in ways that follow the world’s patterns! This includes piling on support, awareness, rhetoric, and dissent in public forums and social media, as well as physical participation in rallies and protests related to this issue.

The reason for this is simple: we are not to love the world or participate in its system, because this world is passing away (1 John 2:15-17).  Jesus calls us salt and light of the earth (Matthew 5:13-16) and ambassadors for Christ (2 Corinthians 5:20). We are to seek the things above (Colossians 3:1-3) instead of corruptible things (Romans 8:21, Galatians 6:8, Ephesians 4:22, Ephesians 4:29, 2 Peter 1:4, 2 Peter 2:19). We are also to honor Christ by being prepared to tell people with gentleness and respect the reason why we have hope (1 Peter 3:14-15). We should point people to the gospel by addressing the real issue, which is the sin in each human heart (Jeremiah 17:9) causing us to be separated from God.

The world has declared ownership over social causes and the agendas associated with them. It is not possible or even wise to attempt to wrestle them from the world and redeem them on our own power. More than that, the world’s wisdom focuses not on root causes that are aligned with God’s word, but on social and societal constructs which are already corrupted by humankind (1 Corinthians 2:6).

This is made so clear by the BLM movement, which seeks to push agendas far beyond simply affirming the value of lives of people of color. The belief system outlined by the movement’s official website makes it clear that in order to align yourself with the statement “black lives matter'' as it is used in the movement, you must affirm LGBTQ+ lifestyles as appropriate and good, and reject the Bible’s clear principles and teaching on the role and function of the family and each member of it. When we are sucked into the world’s movements and causes, we acquiesce to its beliefs and practices, and bring judgement on our own heads (Romans 1, 1 Peter 2).

So what part, if any, of the cause that is sweeping our country today should we rally to? God gives us many indications in scripture that we are to be mindful of and care for people who cannot care for or defend themselves. This includes the poor, orphans, widows, fellow Christians and many others. What we are never called to in scripture, and sternly warned against (James 2:1), is partiality. This means we can (and should) involve ourselves with caring for the needs of and defending the rights of people in all people groups who are marginalized in any way. Everything from praying to participating in the democratic process is on the table here. But we must be careful not to look for and push solutions to problems using the wisdom of the world (James 3:15-18).

For example to suggest that systemic racism exists and is targeted towards a particular skin color, and that it can be solved by making laws that restrict and reform law enforcement is a worldly approach that aligns us with the world’s system and practices. Without considering why police and communities of color are at enmity with one another, we run rough-shod over God’s word and the example Jesus Christ modeled in his earthly ministry. What people of all ethnic and national origins need is the love of God in their hearts that comes from a deep and personal relationship with Jesus Christ. What the Church needs is to be the bride of Christ (Ephesians 5:23, 32). What is missing from our lives, no matter what we look like, is a family unit that is modeled after God’s design, in which we are adopted as heirs of God with Christ (Galatians 4:5-7). What we need is fathers to be fathers, mothers to be mothers, and examples of Godly living and leadership that point us to God continually. No law or behavior modification could ever achieve the kind of change that is possible in Christ (Matthew 18:26, Mark 10:27, Luke 18:27).

## What is our political ideal?

This year, we spent much of our mental and emotional capital on political proceedings. We had an election that challenged our political and ideological beliefs, and strained whatever remaining trust we had in our journalistic media. Picking sides based on political leanings and social identities, the world has “gone after” (John 12:19) our political leaders, looking for a savior for our collective national soul. What grieves me deeply is the extent to which the church has followed the world into this egregious form of idolatry. When I see pastors, teachers, friends and family members (many of whom I have deeply admired and based much of my passion and desire for sharing the Gospel of Jesus Christ with others) participating in this un-Biblical practice, I begin to feel like I must be missing something central to the Christian faith. Why am I, unlike my mentors, friends and family members, unable to feel compelled to worship at the feet of political leaders? Why am I unconcerned when a new administration takes office? Should I be outraged, and feel compelled to acts of terrorism and violence in order to “purge the threat of an evil political faction” from my country?

### Shifting focus

My message for Christians in 2021 as we look forward to a new administration, one which is quite possibly misaligned with our fundamental Christian beliefs, is this: Shift your focus. I recently shared an analogy with a group of men at a fellowship group.

Our lives are being lived in the midst of a storm. Swirling all around us are the winds of doctrine, the seas of opinion, and the waves of an amorphous, unattached and historical ignorant culture (Ephesians 4:14). We are, as it were, in the eye of the storm in our Christian circles. We have the ability to remain unaffected, being in the boat and possessing all of the necessary provisions to survive. But instead of seeing our situation for what it is, we are constantly seeking and striving to see through the storm. As we look, we see only more chaos and danger. We begin to fear and despair, believing that our lives are in imminent danger. What we must do is take our eyes out of the storm and look to Jesus Christ (Luke 8:24-25), the Savior of our eternal souls. When we look to Christ and Christ alone, the raging of the storm is immediately quelled. It’s as if the tempest is forcibly frozen in place, put at bay, and squelched into oblivion. But the moment we take our eyes from Christ and give in to our fear (Matthew 14:30), the storm rages on and we begin to sink. Constant refocus on Christ, and climbing into the lifeboat by grasping the freely offered hand of the Savior (Matthew 14:31-33) allows us to acknowledge that which matters most. “Truly, you are the Son of God.”

## A call to action?

We should seek to promote salvation and reconciliation with the Father to solve the biggest human problems the world faces. We can seek to dispel or change laws and policies in society which are wrong and actively cause harm to anyone and promote true justice and righteousness which comes from God (Isaiah 33:5-6), because we have a guidebook for moral uprightness and integrity that is irrefutable and authored by a perfect moral authority. But we should not seek to enforce unity and love or substitute God’s influence on someone's life for a temporal solution. Instead, we should practice love (John 13:34-35), demonstrate unity (Ephesians 4:1-6) and multiply disciples of Jesus (Matthew 28:18-20) for the glory of God and the benefit of all lives. Let us put forth energies for furthering the Kingdom of God, that which is eternal and not passing away like the things of this world (1 Corinthians 7:31). Let us store up treasures in Heaven, where moth and rust do not destroy and where thieves do not break in and steal (Matthew 6:19-20) what we have strived for. Let us continually focus our attention on the God of all eternity, at whose right hand sits the Prince of the World, the Holy One, the Lamb of God, who was slain, and yet lives!